## Afterword

Conversation about the narrative paradigm grows apace. The most constructive contribution I can make to the dialogue at this moment, I think, is to supplement what I said in the clothbound edition of Human Communication as Narration, which concerned what the narrative paradigm is. Here I would like to indicate what it is not.

First, it is not a rhetoric. As I say in the conclusion, “The narrative paradigm is the foundation on which a complete rhetoric needs to be built.” This structure would provide “a comprehensive explanation of the creation, composition, adaptation, presentation, and reception of symbolic messages.”

Second, the book is not about rhetorical criticism, or at least the way I would deal with the topic. While it is true that the narrative paradigm concerns the interpretation and assessment of rhetorical messages, the book does not explore the ways in which the rhetorical critic thinks or writes. A book on rhetorical criticism would do this by examining the concepts and practices (actual examples) that mark the explication or evaluation of texts read from different perspectives: What can we reveal about a text by knowing its genre? What can we say of interest about a text by knowing its author? What can we disclose in a text by knowing the audience(s) for whom it is intended or meaningful? And what can we expose in a text by reconstructing or deconstructing it in terms of itself? Whatever theory a critic may adopt is but a means to answering one or more of these questions. It is the case, of course, that good answers can produce or modify theory. The interest of the critic, however, is to communicate what is remarkable about the text.

Third, the narrative paradigm is not a celebration of narration as an individuated form—as anecdote, depiction, characterization, and so on—or as a genre in and of itself. If the narrative paradigm celebrates anything, it celebrates human beings, and it does this by reaffirming their nature as storytellers. It affirms that natration as individuated form and as genre—like other individuated forms (such as argument) and genre (such as argumentation)—are expressive of good reasons, if viewed rhetorically. And when they are so experienced, they are constitutive of people, community, and the world.

Fourth, as just suggested, the narrative paradigm does not deny the utility of traditional genres—in poetic, rhetoric, philosophy, sciences, and so on. It does insist, however, that regardless of genre, discourse will always tell a story and insofar as it invites an audience to believe it or to act on it, the narrative paradigm and its attendant logic, narrative rationality, are available for interpretation and assessment. (A brief account of my approach to genre appears in chapter seven.)

Fifth, the narrative paradigm does not assert that some communication cannot
be seen as serving other than rhetorical functions. For example, some communications can be described aptly as phatic or consummatory, and all human communication is recognized as reflecting unconscious motives and achieving unintended : results. It is only when communication is considered seriously in regard to its advice or fostering of belief, attitude, or action that the narrative paradigm becomes relevant: to ascertain the meaning and merit of the communication as a ground for decision and performance.

Sixth, the narrative paradigm is not a rejection of the tradition of argumentation, as I hoped chapter two would clearly show. What is rejected is the specific notion that reason only appears in discourse when it takes the individuated forms of inference or implication, or the genre of argumentation. Also rejected is any conception of human communication that denies or ignores values. The “logic of good reasons,” I want to stress, combines tests of reasoning and tests of values. It adds to them, considerations of coherence—structural (argumentative), material, and characteriological—to comprise the construct of narrative rationality.

Seventh, the narrative paradigm does not deny that power, ideology, distortion, or totalitarian forces are or can be significant features of communicative practices. Regardless of their presence, however, decision and action are inevitable, and their appearance is always in the context of ongoing stories. If they were the only features of communicative practices, decision and action would only and always be: whose domination shall we submit to and live by? I continue to believe that some stories are more truthful and humane than others.

In short, the narrative paradigm is a philosophical statement that is meant to offer an approach to interpretation and assessment of human communication——assuming that all forms of human communication can be seen fundamentally as stories, as interpretations of aspects of the world occurring in time and shaped by history, culture, and character.

Several books have appeared since Human Communication as Narration went to press, which enrich the conversation about narration as paradigm. I recommend each of them: Richard Harvey Brown, Society as Text: Essays on Rhetoric, Reason, and Reality (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987); Jerome Bruner, Actual Minds, Possible Worlds (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1986); David Carr, Time, Narrative, and History (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1986); Wallace Martin, Recent Theories of Narrative (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1986); and the third Volume of Paul Ricouer’s Time and Narrative (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988). I should also mention three other books that significantly bear on the theme of narration and human com munication: M. M. Bakhtin, The Dialogic Imagination, trans. Caryl Emerson and Michael Holquist (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1981); Frederic Jameson, The Political Unconscious: Narrative as a Socially Symbolic Act (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1981); and, Jean-Francois Lyotard, The Post-Modern Condition: A Report on Knowledge, trans. Geoff Bennington and Brian Massumi (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984).

The foregoing is offered with the hope that it may forestall unnecessary misunderstanding. There is no anticipation that it will do this completely, as human communication is too imbued with the shortcomings that people are heir to for that. Nor is there any expectation that it will eliminate disagreements. It is not meant to do this either. It is meant to keep the conversation focused on genuine disagreements rather than those caused by the fragility of the writer and readers.
